# NAME

scmtap - TAP emitting test framework for scheme


# SYNOPSIS

(use-modules (scmtap))

(*with-test-bundle* "test bundle name" **...**)

(*with-fs-test-bundle* **...**)

(*define-test* "test name" **...**)

(*todo* **...**)

(*require* **...**)

(*pass-if-true* **EXP**)

(*pass-if-false* **EXP**)

(*pass-if-=* **EXP-a** **EXP-b**) ;; See TEST CASE MACROS for more.


# DESCRIPTION

*scmtap* is a framework for writing test suites in Scheme, that emit output
compliant with the TAP protocol. It features a fairly rich API for conveniently
writing large, yet maintainable test suites.

Currently, the code makes use of a number of non-standard features from GNU
Guile. No other scheme implementation is actively supported at this point.


# TERMINOLOGY

TODO


# ANATOMY OF A TEST SCRIPT

TODO


# TEST PROPERTIES

TODO


## Skipping Tests

TODO


### Static Skips

TODO


### Dynamic Skips

TODO


## Marking Tests as TODO

TODO


# TEST CASE MACROS

TODO


## Generic Tests

* *pass-if-true*
* *pass-if-false*


## Equality Tests

* *pass-if-=*
* *pass-if-not-=*
* *pass-if-eq?*
* *pass-if-not-eq?*
* *pass-if-eqv?*
* *pass-if-not-eqv?*
* *pass-if-equal?*
* *pass-if-not-equal?*


## String Tests

* *pass-if-string=?*
* *pass-if-not-string=?*
* *pass-if-string-ci=?*
* *pass-if-not-string-ci=?*


## Exception Handling Tests

* *pass-if-exception*
* *pass-if-any-exception*
* *pass-if-no-exception*


# EXAMPLES

TODO


# SEE ALSO

*TAP::Parser(3)*


# COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2012 Frank Terbeck <ft@bewatermyfriend.org>, All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above
     copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
     disclaimer.
  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
     copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
     disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials
     provided with the distribution.

 THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
 INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND
 FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR
 OR CONTRIBUTORS OF THE PROJECT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
 SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
 PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
 BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
 IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
 ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
 POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
